RELATIONSHIPS AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE
As the egoic mode of consciousness and all the social, political, and economic structures that
it created enter the final stage of collapse, the relationships between men and women reflect
the deep state of crisis in which humanity now finds itself. As humans have become
increasingly identified with their mind, most relationships are not rooted in Being and so turn
into a source of pain and become dominated by problems and conflict.
Millions are now living alone or as single parents, unable to establish an intimate
relationship or unwilling to repeat the insane drama of past relationships. Others go from one
relationship to another, from one pleasure-and-pain cycle to another, in search of the elusive
goal of fulfillment through union with the opposite energy polarity. Still others compromise
and continue to be together in a dysfunctional relationship in which negativity prevails, for
the sake of the children or security, through force of habit, fear of being alone, or some other
mutually "beneficial" arrangement, or even through the unconscious addiction to the
excitement of emotional drama and pain.
However, every crisis represents not only danger but also opportunity. If relationships
energize and magnify egoic mind patterns and activate the pain-body, as they do at this time,
why not accept this fact rather than try to escape from it? Why not cooperate with it instead
of avoiding relationships or continuing to pursue the phantom of an ideal partner as an
answer to your problems or a means of feeling fulfilled? The opportunity that is concealed
within every crisis does not manifest until all the facts of any given situation are
acknowledged and fully accepted. As long as you deny them, as long as you try to escape
from them or wish that things were different, the window of opportunity does not open up,
and you remain trapped inside that situation, which will remain the same or deteriorate
further.
With the acknowledgment and acceptance of the facts also comes a degree of freedom
from them. For example, when you know there is disharmony and you hold that "knowing,"
through your knowing a new factor has come in, and the disharmony cannot remain
unchanged. When you know you are not at peace, your knowing creates a still space that
surrounds your nonpeace in a loving and tender embrace and then transmutes your nonpeace
into peace. As far as inner transformation is concerned, there is nothing you can do about it.
You cannot transform yourself, and you certainly cannot transform your partner or anybody
else. All you can do is create a space for transformation to happen, for grace and love to
enter